		
Subscribe for $1 a week and get a tote.»
ShopSign in|Link your subscription


The New Yorker

News
Culture
Books
Business & Tech
Humor
Cartoons
Magazine
Video
Podcasts
Archive
Goings On
Subscribe    

Cultural Comment
Bob Dylan as Richard Wagner

By Alex Ross
October 14, 2016

https://media.newyorker.com/photos/59097ae6ebe912338a37852e/master/w_649,c_limit/Ross-Dylan.jpg


If you came of age in the nineteen-sixties, you had to know Bob Dylan; in the eighteen-eighties, it had to be Richard Wagner.PHOTOGRAPH BY DOUG MCKENZIE / GETTY


PHOTOGRAPH BY DOUG MCKENZIE / GETTY
The announcement that Bob Dylan will be given the Nobel Prize in Literature set off a predictable but not entirely pointless controversy. Is Dylan literature? If so, does he deserve a place next to Thomas Mann and T. S. Eliot? And, even then, is there a pragmatic argument to be made against giving another big prize to a pop-culture colossus at a time when so many worthy writers struggle in obscurity? Although my Dylan fandom is as immoderate as anyone’s—in 1998, I followed him around the country for several weeks and wrote about the experience for The New Yorker—I’ve been half-swayed by the less huffy protests. As the novelist Hari Kunzru has observed, a Nobel citation can exponentially increase a writer’s audience and help keep independent publishers afloat; in 2016, that opportunity was lost. On the other hand, Dylan did write the line “Behind every beautiful thing there’s been some kind of pain.”

The questions posed by this latest Dylan coronation go deeper than the winner-takes-all cultural economy of the early twenty-first century. We are confronted, once again, with the intricately tangled relationship between words and music. What happens when they merge? How does the language of one affect the language of the other? When a sung text takes hold of us, which is the more active force? (Two operas ponder the issue: Salieri’s “Prima la musica e poi le parole”—“First the Music, Then the Words”—and Strauss’s “Capriccio,” which asks, “Word or tone—which do you prefer?”) And how do we comprehend the rare artist who transforms both worlds at once?
The debate over the proper categorization of Dylan’s talent has been going on for more than fifty years. By the time he released “Highway 61 Revisited,” in 1965, he was being described not just as a songwriter in the American popular tradition but also as a poet in the vein of Whitman and Ginsberg. In December, 1965, Thomas Meehan wrote a piece for the Times Magazine asking whether Dylan was the “best writer in America today.” A Brown University student was quoted saying, “Any one of [Dylan’s] songs, like ‘A Hard Rain’s a-Gonna Fall,’ is more interesting to us, both in a literary and a social sense, than an entire volume of Pulitzer Prize verse by someone like Robert Lowell.” People like Lowell tended not to agree. Stanley Kunitz and Louis Simpson, when approached by Meehan, preferred to label Dylan a “popular artist” or “entertainer” rather than a poet. W. H. Auden diplomatically said, “I am afraid I don’t know his work at all.”

There had been a phenomenon like this before. In the nineteenth century, arguments raged around a figure who made his name in the musical sphere but who also claimed literary significance. He was attacked as a dilettante, one whose music wavered between bombast and bizarrerie, whose poetic productions mixed platitude and gibberish. He was aligned in his early years with revolutionary politics and later appeared to betray those politics in favor of conservatism and mysticism. All the same, he became a magnetic figure for younger generations and exerted a vast influence on literature and other art forms. If you came of age in the nineteen-sixties and seventies, you had to know Dylan; in the eighteen-eighties and nineties, it had to be Richard Wagner.

To place Dylan in the same sentence as Wagner is to invite various objections, not least from the principals. A composer who infamously thought that Jews lacked the capacity for original musical creation would probably have made no exception for the former Robert Zimmerman. Dylan, for his part, seems to favor Mozart and Beethoven over Wagner, whom he colorfully described, in a 1993 interview, as “one of the archcriminals of all time.” The personalities could not be more unalike. Wagner was antic, garrulous, incapable of keeping his mouth shut. Dylan is, by all reports, shy, sly, inveterately oblique. (If members of the Swedish Academy believe that _this _time Dylan will bask in the attention and socialize with those who are honoring him, they haven’t spent much time on Maggie’s Farm.)

ADVERTISEMENT

Yet the similarities are more than trivial. Nietzsche wrote that Wagner was, at bottom, neither a composer nor a poet but an actor, a theatrical personality, who seized on opera as his medium: “He belongs elsewhere, not in the history of music; one should not confuse him with the genuine masters of that. . . . He _became _a musician, he _became _a poet because the tyrant within him, his actor’s genius, compelled him.” The same might be said of the movie-mad kid from Hibbing, Minnesota. In any case, Dylan’s musical credentials are still being questioned. He could never really sing, people say; he can’t play the guitar particularly well; the songs themselves are said to be simplistic and unoriginal. With both Wagner and Dylan, these rumors of musical incapacity are erroneous, but the perception is telling: talent is not following the usual trajectory.

On the literary side, German speakers routinely wince at the more convoluted passages in Wagner’s librettos and prose writings. Audiences spellbound by “Tristan und Isolde” at the Metropolitan Opera will inevitably stumble over the subtitles (“universal stream of the World-Breath” and so on). Likewise, even Dylan’s greatest songs can look a little flat and feeble on the page. Listening to the third verse of “Simple Twist of Fate” never fails to make me stop in wonder:

A saxophone someplace far off played
As she was walking on by the arcade
As the light burst through a beat-up shade
Where he was waking up
She dropped a coin into the cup
Of a blind man at the gate
And forgot about a simple twist of fate.

But I doubt anyone would think twice about this passage without the gently devastating music that accompanies it—the vocal line that climbs an octave to “gate” as a descending chromatic line unwinds in the bass. (Incidentally, it is more or less the same bass line as the one that propels Dido’s Lament, in Purcell’s “Dido and Aeneas”—an aria that ends, “Remember me, but ah! forget my fate.”)

What matters is the explosive fusion of words and music, and in both cases music is the igniting element. In my 1999 article, I argued that the musical component of Dylan’s genius has been consistently undervalued: the songs have an unshakable structure, an old-as-the-hills presence. Furthermore, Dylan’s habit of constantly fiddling with his work in performance, however much it may irritate his longtime fans, gives the songs mobility in time: they are saved from becoming fixed objects, cultural bric-a-brac. You could compare Dylan’s fluidity to the often bewildering metamorphoses that stage directors impose on Wagner operas—variations that the composer may not have explicitly desired but that the works themselves seem to demand, not least because of their dreamlike sense of time and space.
Still, it’s never the music alone. The Prelude to “Tristan” is an immensely seductive stretch of orchestral writing, but it functions as a shimmering backdrop to a drama that delivers shocks of contrast: for example, Isolde rasping, “Who dares to mock me?” as she enters. Dylan, too, burns brightest when music and lyrics operate not in tandem but at cross-purposes. In “The Groom’s Still Waiting at the Altar”—listen to the 1980 live version with Mike Bloomfield—the band barges through a basic blues stomp while Dylan spits out lyrics that wallow in a mystical mire:

Prayed in the ghetto with my face into the cement
Heard the last moan of the boxer, seen the massacre of the innocent
Felt around for the light switch, became nauseated
Just me and an overweight dancer between walls that have deteriorated

You have a feeling, at such moments, that popular tradition has been possessed by an alien, ironic intelligence. It’s unsettling to realize that the head-bopping music and the mind-bending words are products of the same disjunctive imagination. The song becomes a vortex. It thus becomes just a little Wagnerian.

The debate over Dylan’s Nobel will go on for a while, as it should: lockstep praise is never healthy. Chances are, however, that in fifty years the Swedish Academy, which has made any number of dubious and perplexing choices over the years, will have no reason to feel ashamed of the selection of Bob Dylan—and will have no need to explain who he was. Love him or hate him, he is a towering figure in modern culture: his appeal has transcended generations and inspired small libraries of commentary. He deserves the Nobel Prize in Word and Tone, but this will have to do.

Alex Ross has been contributing to The New Yorker since 1993, and he became the magazine’s music critic in 1996.Read more »
More:Bob DylanMusicNobel PrizeRichard Wagner

Catch up on the cultural conversation. Sign up for our weekly Culture Review newsletter.
Go


Most Popular

1.News Desk
From Aggressive Overtures to Sexual Assault: Harvey Weinstein’s Accusers Tell Their Stories
By Ronan Farrow

2.Culture Desk
Eminem’s Takedown of Trump in the Age of Angry White Men
By Doreen St. Félix

3.Satire from The Borowitz Report
Trump Says I.Q. “Even Higher” Now That He Knows Virgin Islands Are Part of U.S.
By Andy Borowitz

4. Culture Desk
Lindsay Lohan, Harvey Weinstein, and the Draw of the Despot
By Naomi Fry

5.Amy Davidson Sorkin
Donald Trump’s Terrible Executive Order on Health Care
By Amy Davidson Sorkin
Our Thirty Most Popular


Recommended Stories

Cultural Comment
Let’s Celebrate the Bob Dylan Nobel Win
For all the foibles of the prize and its selection committee, can we just bask a little while in this one?

By David Remnick
Oct. 13, 2016


Page-Turner
Our Favorite Dylan Lyrics
New Yorker writers and editors on words from the newly minted Nobel laureate that have stuck with them.

By The New Yorker 
Oct. 13, 2016


Cultural Comment
A Transcendent Patti Smith Accepts Bob Dylan’s Nobel Prize
Smith’s performance of Dylan’s “A Hard Rain’s A-Gonna Fall,” to orchestral accompaniment, moved some audience members to tears.

By Amanda Petrusich
Dec. 10, 2016


Listen to the New Yorker Radio Hour
Buy the Cover
Play the Jigsaw Puzzle
News & Politics
Daily Comment
John Cassidy
Amy Davidson
Ryan Lizza
Benjamin Wallace-Wells
Culture
Cultural Comment
Culture Desk
Goings On About Town
The Critics
Jia Tolentino
Persons of Interest
Business, Science & Tech
Currency
Elements
Maria Konnikova
Humor
Daily Shouts
Shouts & Murmurs
The Borowitz Report
Cartoons
Daily Cartoon
Cartoon Caption Contest
Cartoon Bank
Books & Fiction
Page-Turner
Books
Literary Lives
Poems
Fiction
Magazine
This Week's Issue
Archive
Subscribe
Photography
Photo Booth
Portfolio
Video
Culture
Humor
Politics
Business
Science & Tech
Books
Sports
Podcasts
The New Yorker Radio Hour
Political Scene
The Writer's Voice
Fiction
Poetry
Out Loud
More
Customer Care
Buy the Cover
Apps
Jigsaw Puzzle
SecureDrop
Store
RSS
Site Map
Newsletters
The Daily
Culture Review
Podcasts
Cartoons
John Cassidy
The Borowitz Report
Fiction
Goings On About Town
About Us
About
Careers
Contact
FAQ
Media Kit
Press
Accessibility Help
Follow Us

© 2017 Condé Nast. All rights reserved. Use of this site constitutes acceptance of our user agreement (effective 1/2/2016) and privacy policy (effective 1/2/2016). Your California privacy rights. The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with prior written permission of Condé Nast. The New Yorker may earn a portion of sales from products and services that are purchased through links on our site as part of our affiliate partnerships with retailers.





